README.md, before:

# TTY::Command [![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)][gitter]
[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/tty-command.svg)][gem]
[![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/piotrmurach/tty-command.svg?branch=master)][travis]
[![Code Climate](https://codeclimate.com/github/piotrmurach/tty-command/badges/gpa.svg)][codeclimate]
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/piotrmurach/tty-command/badge.svg)][coverage]
[![Inline docs](http://inch-ci.org/github/piotrmurach/tty-command.svg?branch=master)][inchpages]

[gitter]: https://gitter.im/piotrmurach/tty
[gem]: http://badge.fury.io/rb/tty-command
[travis]: http://travis-ci.org/piotrmurach/tty-command
[codeclimate]: https://codeclimate.com/github/piotrmurach/tty-command
[coverage]: https://coveralls.io/github/piotrmurach/tty-command
[inchpages]: http://inch-ci.org/github/piotrmurach/tty-command

> Execute external commands with pretty output logging and capture stdout, stderr and exit status. Redirect stdin, stdout and stderr of each command to a file or a string.

**TTY::Command** provides independent command execution component for [TTY](https://github.com/piotrmurach/tty) toolkit.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'tty-command'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install tty-command

## Contents

* [1. Usage](#1-usage)
* [2. Interface](#2-interface)
  * [2.1 Execute](#21-execute)
  * [2.2 Execute!](#22-execute)
  * [2.3 Environment variables](#23-environment-variables)
  * [2.3 Command](#24-command)
  * [2.5 Options](#25-options)
    * [2.5.1 Current directory](#251-current-directory)
    * [2.5.2 Redirection](#252-redirection)
    * [2.5.3 Timeout](#253-timeout)
    * [2.5.4 User](#254-user)
    * [2.5.5 Group](#255-group)
    * [2.5.6 Umask](#256-umask)
    * [2.5.7 Dry run](#257-dry-run)
  * [2.6 Result](#26-result)
    * [2.6.1 success?](#261-success)
    * [2.6.2 failure?](#262-failure)
    * [2.6.3 exited?](#263-exited)
  * [2.7 Output Logging](#27-output-logging)
    * [2.7.1 Custom Printer](#271-custom-printer)
* [3. Example](#3-example)

## 1. Usage

Create command instance:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new
```

And then, to run command and capture its stadout and stderr use `execute`:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute('ls -la')
out, err = cmd.execute('echo Hello!')
```

You can also split command into arguments like so:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute(:ls, '-la')
out, err = cmd.execite(:echo, 'Hello!')
```

You can also provide custom redirections:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello!', :out => 'file.txt')
```

## 2. Interface

### 2.1 Execute

Execute starts the specified command and waits for it to complete.

The argument signature for `execute` is as follows:

`execute([env], command, [argv1, ...], [options])`

The `env`, `command` and `options` arguments are described in the following sections.

The command executes successfully and returns result, if the command exits with a zero exit status, and has no problems handling stdin, stdout, and stderr.

If the command fails to execute or doesn't complete successfully, an `TTY::Command::ExitError` is raised.

For example, to display file contents:

```ruby
cmd.execute('cat file.txt')
```

When command is run without raising `TTY::Command::ExitError`, a `TTY::Command::Result` is returned that records stdout and stderr:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute('date')
puts "The date is #{out}"
# => "The date is Tue 10 May 2016 22:30:15 BST\n"
```

### 2.2 Execute!

You can also use `execute!` to run a command that will raise an error `TTY::Command::ExitError` when the command exits with non-zero exit code: 

```ruby
cmd.execute!('cat file')
# => raises TTY::Command::ExitError
# Executing `cat file` failed with
#  exit status: 1
#  ...
```

The `ExitError` message will include:
  * the name of command executed
  * the exit status
  * stdout bytes
  * stderr bytes

### 2.3 Environment variables

The environment variables need to be provided as hash entries, that can be set directly as a first argument:

```ruby
cmd.execute({'RAILS_ENV' => 'PRODUCTION'}, :rails, 'server')
```

or as an option with `:env` key:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:rails, 'server', env: {rails_env: :production})
```

When a value in env is nil, the variable is unset in the child process:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', env: {foo: 'bar', baz: nil})
```

### 2.4 Command

To actually run a command, you need to provide the command name and one or more arguments to execute:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', 'world')
```

### 2.5 Options

When a hash is given in the last argument (options), it allows to specify a current directory, umask, user, group and and zero or more fd redirects for the child process.

#### 2.5.1 Current directory

To change directory in which the command is run pass the `:chidir` option:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', chdir: '/var/tmp')
```

#### 2.5.2 Redirection

The streams can be redirected using hash keys `:in`, `:out`, `:err`, a fixnum, an IO and array. The keys specify a given file descriptor for the child process.

You can specify a filename for redirection as a hash value:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:ls, :in => "/dev/null")   # read mode
cmd.execute(:ls, :out => "/dev/null")  # write mode
cmd.execute(:ls, :err => "log")        # write mode
cmd.execute(:ls, [:out, :err] => "/dev/null") # write mode
cmd.execute(:ls, 3 => "/dev/null")     # read mode
```

You can also provide actual file descriptor for redirection:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:cat, :in => open('/etc/passwd'))
```

For example, to merge stderr into stdout you would do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:ls, '-la', :stderr => :stdout)
cmd.execute(:ls, '-la', 2 => 1)
```

#### 2.5.3 Timeout

You can timeout command execuation by providing the `:timeout` option in seconds:

```ruby
cmd.execute("while test 1; sleep 1; done", timeout: 5)
```

Please run `examples/timeout.rb` to see timeout in action.

#### 2.5.4 User

To execute command as a given user do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', user: 'piotr')
```

#### 2.5.5 Group

To execute command as part of group do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', group: 'devs')
```

#### 2.5.6 Umask

To execute command with umask do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', umask: '007')
```

#### 2.5.7 Dry run

To simulate execution of the command use the `:dry_run` option:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new(dry_run: true)
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello world')
# => [123abc] (dry run) echo hello world
```

### 2.6 Result

Each time you execute command the stdout and stderro are captured and return as result. The result can be examined directly by casting it to tuple:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
```

However, if you want to you can defer reading:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.out
result.err
```

#### 2.6.1 success?

To check if command exited successfully use `success?`:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.success? # => true
```

#### 2.6.2 failure?

To check if command exited unsuccessfully use `failure?` or `failed?`:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.failure?  # => false
result.failed?   # => false
```

#### 2.6.3 exited?

To check if command run to complition use `exited?` or `complete?`:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.exited?    # => true
result.complete?  # => true
```

### 2.7 Output Logging

By default when command is executed, the command itself with all arguments as well as command's output are printed to `stdout` using the `:pretty` printer. If you wish to change printer you can do so by passing `:printer` option out of

* `:null` - no output
* `:pretty` - colorful output,
* `:progress` - minimal output with green dot for success and F for failure
* `:quiet` - only output actual command stdout and stderr

to command like so:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new(printer: :progress)
```

By default the printers log to `stdout` but this can be changed by passing object that responds to `<<` message:

```ruby
logger = Logger.new('dev.log')
cmd = TTY::Command.new(output: output)
```

You can force printer to always in print in color by passing `:color` option:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new(color: true)
```

#### 2.7.1 Custom printer

If the built-in printers do not meet your requirements you can create your own. Add the very minimum you need to specify the `write` method that will be called during the lifecycle of command execution:

```ruby
CustomPrinter < TTY::Command::Printers::Abstract
  def write(message)
    puts message
  end
end

printer = CustomPrinter

cmd = TTY::Command.new(printer: printer)
```

## 3. Example

Here's a slightly more elaborate example to illustrate how tty-command can improve on plain old shell scripts. This example installs a new version of Ruby on an Ubuntu machine.

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new

# dependencies
cmd.execute "apt-get -y install build-essential checkinstall"

# fetch ruby if necessary
if !File.exists?("ruby-2.3.0.tar.gz")
  puts "Downloading..."
  cmd.execute "wget http://ftp.ruby-lang.org/pub/ruby/2.3/ruby-2.3.0.tar.gz"
  cmd.execute "tar xvzf ruby-2.3.0.tar.gz"
end

# now install
Dir.chdir("ruby-2.3.0") do
  puts "Building..."
  cmd.execute "./configure --prefix=/usr/local"
  cmd.execute "make"
end
```

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/piotrmurach/tty-command. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org) code of conduct.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 2016 Piotr Murach. See LICENSE for further details.

Commit message:

suggested changes to Usage section
Trying to break this up into small PRs... :)

README.md, after:

# TTY::Command [![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)][gitter]
[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/tty-command.svg)][gem]
[![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/piotrmurach/tty-command.svg?branch=master)][travis]
[![Code Climate](https://codeclimate.com/github/piotrmurach/tty-command/badges/gpa.svg)][codeclimate]
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/piotrmurach/tty-command/badge.svg)][coverage]
[![Inline docs](http://inch-ci.org/github/piotrmurach/tty-command.svg?branch=master)][inchpages]

[gitter]: https://gitter.im/piotrmurach/tty
[gem]: http://badge.fury.io/rb/tty-command
[travis]: http://travis-ci.org/piotrmurach/tty-command
[codeclimate]: https://codeclimate.com/github/piotrmurach/tty-command
[coverage]: https://coveralls.io/github/piotrmurach/tty-command
[inchpages]: http://inch-ci.org/github/piotrmurach/tty-command

> Execute external commands with pretty output logging and capture stdout, stderr and exit status. Redirect stdin, stdout and stderr of each command to a file or a string.

**TTY::Command** provides independent command execution component for [TTY](https://github.com/piotrmurach/tty) toolkit.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'tty-command'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install tty-command

## Contents

* [1. Usage](#1-usage)
* [2. Interface](#2-interface)
  * [2.1 Execute](#21-execute)
  * [2.2 Execute!](#22-execute)
  * [2.3 Environment variables](#23-environment-variables)
  * [2.3 Command](#24-command)
  * [2.5 Options](#25-options)
    * [2.5.1 Current directory](#251-current-directory)
    * [2.5.2 Redirection](#252-redirection)
    * [2.5.3 Timeout](#253-timeout)
    * [2.5.4 User](#254-user)
    * [2.5.5 Group](#255-group)
    * [2.5.6 Umask](#256-umask)
    * [2.5.7 Dry run](#257-dry-run)
  * [2.6 Result](#26-result)
    * [2.6.1 success?](#261-success)
    * [2.6.2 failure?](#262-failure)
    * [2.6.3 exited?](#263-exited)
  * [2.7 Output Logging](#27-output-logging)
    * [2.7.1 Custom Printer](#271-custom-printer)
* [3. Example](#3-example)

## 1. Usage

Create a command instance and then execute some commands:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new
cmd.execute('ls -la')
cmd.execute('echo Hello!')
```

Note that `execute` will throw an exception if the command fails. This is already an improvement over ordinary shell scripts, which just keep on going when things go bad. That usually makes things worse.

You can use the return value to capture stdout and stderr:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute('cat ~/.bashrc | grep alias')
```

Instead of using a plain old string, you can break up the arguments and they'll get escaped if necessary:

```ruby
path = "hello world"
FileUtils.touch(path)
cmd.execute("sum #{path}")  # this will fail due to bad escaping
cmd.execute("sum", path)    # this gets escaped automatically
```

## 2. Interface

### 2.1 Execute

Execute starts the specified command and waits for it to complete.

The argument signature for `execute` is as follows:

`execute([env], command, [argv1, ...], [options])`

The `env`, `command` and `options` arguments are described in the following sections.

The command executes successfully and returns result, if the command exits with a zero exit status, and has no problems handling stdin, stdout, and stderr.

If the command fails to execute or doesn't complete successfully, an `TTY::Command::ExitError` is raised.

For example, to display file contents:

```ruby
cmd.execute('cat file.txt')
```

When command is run without raising `TTY::Command::ExitError`, a `TTY::Command::Result` is returned that records stdout and stderr:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute('date')
puts "The date is #{out}"
# => "The date is Tue 10 May 2016 22:30:15 BST\n"
```

### 2.2 Execute!

You can also use `execute!` to run a command that will raise an error `TTY::Command::ExitError` when the command exits with non-zero exit code: 

```ruby
cmd.execute!('cat file')
# => raises TTY::Command::ExitError
# Executing `cat file` failed with
#  exit status: 1
#  ...
```

The `ExitError` message will include:
  * the name of command executed
  * the exit status
  * stdout bytes
  * stderr bytes

### 2.3 Environment variables

The environment variables need to be provided as hash entries, that can be set directly as a first argument:

```ruby
cmd.execute({'RAILS_ENV' => 'PRODUCTION'}, :rails, 'server')
```

or as an option with `:env` key:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:rails, 'server', env: {rails_env: :production})
```

When a value in env is nil, the variable is unset in the child process:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', env: {foo: 'bar', baz: nil})
```

### 2.4 Command

To actually run a command, you need to provide the command name and one or more arguments to execute:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', 'world')
```

### 2.5 Options

When a hash is given in the last argument (options), it allows to specify a current directory, umask, user, group and and zero or more fd redirects for the child process.

#### 2.5.1 Current directory

To change directory in which the command is run pass the `:chidir` option:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', chdir: '/var/tmp')
```

#### 2.5.2 Redirection

The streams can be redirected using hash keys `:in`, `:out`, `:err`, a fixnum, an IO and array. The keys specify a given file descriptor for the child process.

You can specify a filename for redirection as a hash value:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:ls, :in => "/dev/null")   # read mode
cmd.execute(:ls, :out => "/dev/null")  # write mode
cmd.execute(:ls, :err => "log")        # write mode
cmd.execute(:ls, [:out, :err] => "/dev/null") # write mode
cmd.execute(:ls, 3 => "/dev/null")     # read mode
```

You can also provide actual file descriptor for redirection:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:cat, :in => open('/etc/passwd'))
```

For example, to merge stderr into stdout you would do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:ls, '-la', :stderr => :stdout)
cmd.execute(:ls, '-la', 2 => 1)
```

#### 2.5.3 Timeout

You can timeout command execuation by providing the `:timeout` option in seconds:

```ruby
cmd.execute("while test 1; sleep 1; done", timeout: 5)
```

Please run `examples/timeout.rb` to see timeout in action.

#### 2.5.4 User

To execute command as a given user do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', user: 'piotr')
```

#### 2.5.5 Group

To execute command as part of group do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', group: 'devs')
```

#### 2.5.6 Umask

To execute command with umask do:

```ruby
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello', umask: '007')
```

#### 2.5.7 Dry run

To simulate execution of the command use the `:dry_run` option:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new(dry_run: true)
cmd.execute(:echo, 'hello world')
# => [123abc] (dry run) echo hello world
```

### 2.6 Result

Each time you execute command the stdout and stderro are captured and return as result. The result can be examined directly by casting it to tuple:

```ruby
out, err = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
```

However, if you want to you can defer reading:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.out
result.err
```

#### 2.6.1 success?

To check if command exited successfully use `success?`:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.success? # => true
```

#### 2.6.2 failure?

To check if command exited unsuccessfully use `failure?` or `failed?`:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.failure?  # => false
result.failed?   # => false
```

#### 2.6.3 exited?

To check if command run to complition use `exited?` or `complete?`:

```ruby
result = cmd.execute(:echo, 'Hello')
result.exited?    # => true
result.complete?  # => true
```

### 2.7 Output Logging

By default when command is executed, the command itself with all arguments as well as command's output are printed to `stdout` using the `:pretty` printer. If you wish to change printer you can do so by passing `:printer` option out of

* `:null` - no output
* `:pretty` - colorful output,
* `:progress` - minimal output with green dot for success and F for failure
* `:quiet` - only output actual command stdout and stderr

to command like so:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new(printer: :progress)
```

By default the printers log to `stdout` but this can be changed by passing object that responds to `<<` message:

```ruby
logger = Logger.new('dev.log')
cmd = TTY::Command.new(output: output)
```

You can force printer to always in print in color by passing `:color` option:

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new(color: true)
```

#### 2.7.1 Custom printer

If the built-in printers do not meet your requirements you can create your own. Add the very minimum you need to specify the `write` method that will be called during the lifecycle of command execution:

```ruby
CustomPrinter < TTY::Command::Printers::Abstract
  def write(message)
    puts message
  end
end

printer = CustomPrinter

cmd = TTY::Command.new(printer: printer)
```

## 3. Example

Here's a slightly more elaborate example to illustrate how tty-command can improve on plain old shell scripts. This example installs a new version of Ruby on an Ubuntu machine.

```ruby
cmd = TTY::Command.new

# dependencies
cmd.execute "apt-get -y install build-essential checkinstall"

# fetch ruby if necessary
if !File.exists?("ruby-2.3.0.tar.gz")
  puts "Downloading..."
  cmd.execute "wget http://ftp.ruby-lang.org/pub/ruby/2.3/ruby-2.3.0.tar.gz"
  cmd.execute "tar xvzf ruby-2.3.0.tar.gz"
end

# now install
Dir.chdir("ruby-2.3.0") do
  puts "Building..."
  cmd.execute "./configure --prefix=/usr/local"
  cmd.execute "make"
end
```

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/piotrmurach/tty-command. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org) code of conduct.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 2016 Piotr Murach. See LICENSE for further details.
